---
title: Share your feedback about developing with Go
date: 2022-06-01
by:
- Todd Kulesza, for the Go team
tags:
- survey
- community
summary: Help shape the future of Go by sharing your thoughts via the Go Developer Survey
---

For the past six years the Go team has conducted an annual survey of Go
developers. The results of this survey have helped the team plan and prioritize
large changes to the Go ecosystem, such as dependency management, the gopls
language server, and most recently, generics. We want Go to be increasingly
usable by and useful to developers, and your feedback has been a critical aspect
of making this happen. Thoughtfully responding to these surveys takes time and
energy, and we deeply appreciate your efforts to help improve Go.

Today we’re launching a change in how we conduct our annual survey. Rather than
one large survey each November, we plan to launch two smaller surveys at roughly
six-month intervals during the year. Our hope is that shorter surveys will take
less time and effort to respond to, with the added benefit of providing feedback
to the Go team shortly after each new Go release.

Without further ado, [here is the June 2022 edition of the Go Developer
Survey](https://google.qualtrics.com/jfe/form/SV_7O3x4IZKiUn0QCO?s=b)! This
survey will run through June 21st, and we plan to publish anonymous, aggregated
results in late July. It should take less than 10 minutes to complete, and all
questions are optional. Please help to shape Go’s future by sharing your
thoughts and experiences.

[Take the Go Developer
Survey](https://google.qualtrics.com/jfe/form/SV_7O3x4IZKiUn0QCO?s=b) (open June
1st &ndash; June 21st)
